12/06/24

*Typescript :- it is superset of javascript.
             - it is compile language.
             - it is strict type language

*software pre-requist:
1.nodejs
     - node -v // it will show node version.
     npm -v // it will show npm version

2.Typescript
       - npm i typescript -g // it will install typescript
       - tsc -v // it will display typescript version

       
*we can create typescript file by writting filname.tsc
*how to execute typescript file
step1 : filename.ts // it will compile and generate plain js file.
step2 : nodefilename.js // it will execute js file

how to create varaiable in typescript\
syntax: let varaiable name:datatype;


datatype in javascript

oops
1. Classes : it is collection of data-member and member-function.
             it is template which can resuse.
             to class we use class keyword.
             class name start with captical letter.
             syntax: class kar(){
               data member & member function
             }
this: it represented the current object;

2. object:  it is an instance of object.
            by using object we can access class data member & member function 
            syntax: let objectNAME =new class();

construtor : it is special member function of class.
          constructor execute automaticaltty when class object is created or initalixe.
          constructor name must bo only construtor in typescript.

3. Inheritance: accessing parent class property in child class.
                to perform inheritance in between two class we use "extends" keyword.

                syntax : class childClassName Extends parentclassname.
     super() : ir represented parent class constructor in child class.

4  Encalpsulation: wrapping of data into single unit.
5. Adstraction: hidding implementation and showing only functionality.
                    we can achieve by using interface and abstract method , static keyword.

access specifier: 
     public : we can access property inside same class , outside class and in child class also.
     protected : we can access property inside  same class, in child class nut not in outside class. 
     private : we can access class property within same class.


6  polymorphism: ability to take more than one form.
 Method overloading : in this we have multiple method with same in same class.
 Method Overriding : in this we have mutliple method with same name in different classes.

 interface: it is signature of class.
            it contain abstract method in it.
            its child class has reponsibilty to implement interface.
            we create interface by using interface.
            to perform inheritance we use in between class and interface we use implentation keyword.

* Module in typescript : it can be collection of single or mutliple typescript file containting code with specific  
                         purpose.
                         That data or code we can access in another file by exorting and importing.
                         we use export keyword to send data.
                         we use import keyword to access data.
